Updated documentation for chat-members plugin, adding new sections about filters (#1181)
grammyjs/website: site/docs/plugins/chat-members.md

# Chat Members Plugin (`chat-members`)

> This plugin makes it easy to work with `ChatMember` objects, by offering a convenient way to listen for changes in the form of custom filters, and by storing and updating the objects.

Reviewer: Why would I want to work with `ChatMember` objects? Which problems does this solve? It should mention that you can keep track of chat lists etc

Author: Something like this?

Telegram doesn't offer a method in the Bot API to retrieve the members of a chat, you have to keep track of them yourself.
This plugin makes it easy to work with `ChatMember` objects, by offering a convenient way to listen for changes in the form of custom filters, and by storing and updating the objects.

Reviewer: Yep!

## Introduction

> Working with `ChatMember` objects from the Telegram Bot API can sometimes be cumbersome, there are several different statuses that are often interchangeable in most applications, as well as a restricted status that can represent both members of the group and restricted users that are not in the group.

Reviewer: Let's not exaggerate the length of sentences
```suggestion
Working with `ChatMember` objects from the Telegram Bot API can sometimes be cumbersome.
There are several different statuses that are often interchangeable in most applications.
In addition, the restricted status is ambiguous because it can represent both members of the group and restricted users that are not in the group.
```

> This plugin aims to simplify dealing with chat members, by offering fully typed filters for chat member updates.
> 

Reviewer: Either do it, or don't—but don't just aim for things :)
```suggestion
This plugin simplifies dealing with chat members by offering fully typed filters for chat member updates.

```

## Usage

> ### Chat member filters

Reviewer: Title case
```suggestion
### Chat Member Filters
```

> You can listen for two kinds of updates regarding chat members using a Telegram bot: `chat_member` and `my_chat_member`,
> both of them specify the old and new status of the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can listen for two kinds of updates regarding chat members using a Telegram bot: `chat_member` and `my_chat_member`.
Both of them specify the old and new status of the user.
```

- `my_chat_member` updates are received by your bot by default and they inform you about the status of the bot being updated in any chat, as well as users blocking the bot;

> - `chat_member` updates are only received if you specifically include them in the list of allowed updates, they notify about any status changes for users in chats **where your bot is admin**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `chat_member` updates are only received if you explicitly include them in the list of allowed updates, they notify about any status changes for users in chats **where your bot is admin**.
```

Instead of manually filtering the old and new status, chat member filters do this automatically for you, allowing you to react to every type of transition you're interested in.

> Within the handler, types of `old_chat_member` and `new_chat_member` are updated accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within the handler, the types of `old_chat_member` and `new_chat_member` are narrowed down accordingly.
```

::: code-group

```ts [TypeScript]
import { API_CONSTANTS, Bot } from "grammy";
import { chatMemberFilter, myChatMemberFilter } from "@grammyjs/chat-members";

> const bot = new Bot(process.env.BOT_TOKEN!);

Reviewer: I remember that we had a convention about how to initialize a bot in the docs, @quadratz or @rojvv might remember
```suggestion
const bot = new Bot("");
```

const groups = bot.chatType(["group", "supergroup"]);

groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("out", "regular"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("Hello, thank you for adding me to the group!");

> });

Reviewer: I feel like this needs a comment. The string is helpful, but not quite enough yet IMO. Same for the others below.

Author: // Listen for updates where the bot is added to a group as a regular user.
// Listen for updates where the bot is added to a group as an admin.
// Listen for updates where the bot is promoted to admin.
// Listen for updates where the bot is demoted to a regular user.
// Listen for updates where a user joins a group where your bot is admin.

groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("out", "admin"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("Hello, thank you for adding me to the group as admin!");
});

groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("regular", "admin"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("I was promoted to admin!");
});

groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("admin", "regular"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("I am no longer admin");
});

groups.filter(chatMemberFilter("out", "in"), async (ctx) => {
  const user = ctx.chatMember.new_chat_member.user;
  await ctx.reply(`Welcome ${user.first_name} to the group!`);
});

bot.start({

>   // Make sure to specify the desired update types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Make sure to specify the desired update types.
```

});

groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("regular", "admin"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("I was promoted to admin!");
});

groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("admin", "regular"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("I am no longer admin");
});

groups.filter(chatMemberFilter("out", "in"), async (ctx) => {
  const user = ctx.chatMember.new_chat_member.user;
  await ctx.reply(`Welcome ${user.first_name} to the group!`);
});

bot.start({
  // Make sure to specify the desired update types
  allowed_updates: [...API_CONSTANTS.DEFAULT_UPDATE_TYPES, "chat_member"],
});
```

:::

Filters include the regular Telegram statuses (owner, administrator, member, restricted, left, kicked) and some additional ones for convenience:

- `restricted_in`: a member of the chat with restrictions;
- `restricted_out`: not a member of the chat, has restrictions;
- `in`: a member of the chat (administrator, creator, member, restricted_in);
- `out`: not a member of the chat (left, kicked, restricted_out);
- `free`: a member of the chat that isn't restricted (administrator, creator, member);
- `admin`: an admin of the chat (administrator, creator);

> - `regular`: a non-admin member of the chat (member, restricted_in).

Reviewer: Would it make sense to structure this as a table?

Author: Were you thinking something like:

| Original status -> | kicked | left | restricted_out | restricted_in | member | administrator | creator |
| ------------------ | ------ | ---- | -------------- | ------------- | ------ | ------------- | ------- |
| out                | x      | x    | x              |               |        |               |         |
| in                 |        |      |                | x             | x      | x             | x       |
| regular            |        |      |                | x             | x      |               |         |
| free               |        |      |                |               | x      | x             | x       |
| admin              |        |      |                |               |        | x             | x       |

It's also possible to visualize them, something like:

![statuses-venn](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/661544a9-797e-4747-8961-30dbc4395695)

Reviewer: Both are great. I meant the former, but if we are able to do the latter in a format that can be translated easily across all languages, then we can do it, too. For example, we can use ASCII art or we can employ things like mermaid. Not sure if we can get that to work.

Author: Would translation be a requirement for either the table or the diagram? The used words correspond to the queries and statuses already, if we keep the list right before the diagram/table with a sentence like "To summarize, here is what each query corresponds to:" we could translate the list instead (italian as an example of what I mean)

- `restricted_in` (dentro, con restrizioni): un membro della chat con restrizioni;
- `restricted_out` (fuori, con restrizioni): non un membro della chat, ha restrizioni;
- `in` (dentro): un membro della chat (administrator, creator, member, restricted_in);
- `out` (fuori): non un membro della chat (left, kicked, restricted_out);
- `free` (libero): un membro della chat senza restrizioni (administrator, creator, member);
- `admin`: un admin della chat (administrator, creator);
- `regular` (regolare): un membro della chat non-admin (member, restricted_in).

Reviewer: Yep, making sure that only these fixed strings appear in the diagram would mean that it does not have to be translated. We then can't use English words in there, but I guess that's fine. Putting the above explanations close to the diagram somewhere is good.

You can create your custom groupings of chat member types by passing an array instead of a string:

```typescript
groups.filter(
  chatMemberFilter(["restricted", "kicked"], ["free", "left"]),
  async (ctx) => {
    const from = ctx.from;
    const { status: oldStatus, user } = ctx.chatMember.old_chat_member;
    await ctx.reply(
      `${from.first_name} lifted ` +
        `${oldStatus === "kicked" ? "ban" : "restrictions"} ` +
        `from ${user.first_name}`,
    );
  },
);
```

> #### Example usage

Reviewer: Title case
```suggestion
#### Example Usage
```

The best way to use the filters is to pick a set of relevant statuses, for example 'out', 'regular' and 'admin', then
make a table of the transitions between them:

| ↱           | Out         | Regular              | Admin               |
| ----------- | ----------- | -------------------- | ------------------- |
| **Out**     | ban-changed | join                 | join-and-promoted   |
| **Regular** | exit        | restrictions-changed | promoted            |
| **Admin**   | exit        | demoted              | permissions-changed |

Assign a listener to all the transitions that are relevant to your use-case.

> Combine these filters with `bot.chatType` to only listen for transitions for a specific type of chat. Add a middleware to listen to all updates as a way to perform common operations (like updating your database) before handing off control to a specific handler.

Reviewer: Please only write a single sentence per line
```suggestion
Combine these filters with `bot.chatType` to only listen for transitions for a specific type of chat.
Add a middleware to listen to all updates as a way to perform common operations (like updating your database) before handing off control to a specific handler.
```

```typescript
const groups = bot.chatType(["group", "supergroup"]);

> groups.on("chat_member", (ctx, next) => {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
groups.on("chat_member", async (ctx, next) => {
```

  // ran on all updates of type chat_member
  const {
    old_chat_member: { status: oldStatus },
    new_chat_member: { user, status },
    from,
    chat,
  } = ctx.chatMember;
  console.log(
    `In group ${chat.id} user ${from.id} changed status of ${user.id}:`,
    `${oldStatus} -> ${status}`,
  );

  // update database data here

>   return next();

Reviewer: We don't do that stuff in the docs, it only leads to disaster
```suggestion
  await next();
```

});

// specific handlers

groups.filter(chatMemberFilter("out", "in"), async (ctx, next) => {
  const { new_chat_member: { user } } = ctx.chatMember;
  await ctx.reply(`Welcome ${user.first_name}!`);
});
```

> ### Status checking utility

Reviewer: Title case
```suggestion
### Status Checking Utility
```

The `chatMemberIs` utility function can be useful whenever you want to use filtering logic within a handler.

> It takes as input any of the regular and custom statuses (or an array of them) and updates the type of the passed variable.

Reviewer: Feels right to me, but you're free to ignore this one
```suggestion
It takes as input any of the regular and custom statuses (or an array of them), and updates the type of the passed variable.
```

```ts
bot.callbackQuery("foo", async (ctx) => {
  const chatMember = await ctx.getChatMember(ctx.from.id);

  if (!chatMemberIs(chatMember, "free")) {

>     chatMember.status; // "restricted" | "left" | "kicked"

Reviewer: Not related to the docs but I'm curious now: Are the types narrowed down here?

Author: Yep, the comment on both branches is what is seen from the editor.

Reviewer: Very cool

```typescript
const groups = bot.chatType(["group", "supergroup"]);

groups.on("chat_member", async (ctx, next) => {
  // ran on all updates of type chat_member
  const {
    old_chat_member: { status: oldStatus },
    new_chat_member: { user, status },
    from,
    chat,
  } = ctx.chatMember;
  console.log(
    `In group ${chat.id} user ${from.id} changed status of ${user.id}:`,
    `${oldStatus} -> ${status}`,
  );

  // update database data here

  await next();
});

// specific handlers

groups.filter(chatMemberFilter("out", "in"), async (ctx, next) => {
  const { new_chat_member: { user } } = ctx.chatMember;
  await ctx.reply(`Welcome ${user.first_name}!`);
});
```

### Status Checking Utility

The `chatMemberIs` utility function can be useful whenever you want to use filtering logic within a handler.
It takes as input any of the regular and custom statuses (or an array of them), and updates the type of the passed variable.

```ts
bot.callbackQuery("foo", async (ctx) => {
  const chatMember = await ctx.getChatMember(ctx.from.id);

>   if (!chatMemberIs(chatMember, "free")) {

Reviewer: Unrelated to the docs but the plugin could use a hydration feature that permits
```suggestion
  if (!chatMember.is("free")) {
```

Author: That's a very nice idea! They could be added for getChatMember and getChatAdministrators.
I already have a draft of the types (kinda messy right now but I'll work on them) and they seem to work.

# Chat Members Plugin (`chat-members`)

Telegram doesn't offer a method in the Bot API to retrieve the members of a chat, you have to keep track of them yourself.
This plugin makes it easy to work with `ChatMember` objects, by offering a convenient way to listen for changes in the form of custom filters, and by storing and updating the objects.

## Introduction

Working with `ChatMember` objects from the Telegram Bot API can sometimes be cumbersome.
There are several different statuses that are often interchangeable in most applications.
In addition, the restricted status is ambiguous because it can represent both members of the group and restricted users that are not in the group.

> This plugin simplifies dealing with chat members by offering fully typed filters for chat member updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This plugin simplifies dealing with chat members by offering fully-typed filters for chat member updates.
```

## Usage

### Chat Member Filters

You can listen for two kinds of updates regarding chat members using a Telegram bot: `chat_member` and `my_chat_member`.
Both of them specify the old and new status of the user.

> - `my_chat_member` updates are received by your bot by default and they inform you about the status of the bot being updated in any chat, as well as users blocking the bot;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `my_chat_member` updates are received by your bot by default and they inform you about the status of the bot being updated in any chat, as well as users blocking the bot.
```

> - `chat_member` updates are only received if you explicitly include them in the list of allowed updates, they notify about any status changes for users in chats **where your bot is admin**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `chat_member` updates are only received if you explicitly include them in the list of allowed updates, they notify about any status changes for users in chats in which the bot is **admin**.
```

> Instead of manually filtering the old and new status, chat member filters do this automatically for you, allowing you to react to every type of transition you're interested in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead of manually filtering the old and the new statuses, chat member filters do this automatically for you, allowing you to act on any type of transition you're interested in.
```

const bot = new Bot("");
const groups = bot.chatType(["group", "supergroup"]);

// Listen for updates where the bot is added to a group as a regular user.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("out", "regular"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("Hello, thank you for adding me to the group!");
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is added to a group as an admin.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("out", "admin"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("Hello, thank you for adding me to the group as admin!");
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is promoted to admin.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("regular", "admin"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("I was promoted to admin!");
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is demoted to a regular user.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("admin", "regular"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("I am no longer admin");
});

// Listen for updates where a user joins a group where your bot is admin.
groups.filter(chatMemberFilter("out", "in"), async (ctx) => {
  const user = ctx.chatMember.new_chat_member.user;
  await ctx.reply(`Welcome ${user.first_name} to the group!`);
});

bot.start({

>   // Make sure to specify the desired update types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // Make sure to include the "chat_member" update type for the above handlers to work.
```

const bot = new Bot("");
const groups = bot.chatType(["group", "supergroup"]);

// Listen for updates where the bot is added to a group as a regular user.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("out", "regular"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("Hello, thank you for adding me to the group!");
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is added to a group as an admin.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("out", "admin"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("Hello, thank you for adding me to the group as admin!");
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is promoted to admin.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("regular", "admin"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("I was promoted to admin!");
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is demoted to a regular user.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("admin", "regular"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("I am no longer admin");
});

// Listen for updates where a user joins a group where your bot is admin.
groups.filter(chatMemberFilter("out", "in"), async (ctx) => {
  const user = ctx.chatMember.new_chat_member.user;
  await ctx.reply(`Welcome ${user.first_name} to the group!`);
});

bot.start({

>   // Make sure to specify the desired update types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // Make sure to include the "chat_member" update type for the above handlers to work.
```

const bot = new Bot("");
const groups = bot.chatType(["group", "supergroup"]);

// Listen for updates where the bot is added to a group as a regular user.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("out", "regular"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("Hello, thank you for adding me to the group!");
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is added to a group as an admin.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("out", "admin"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("Hello, thank you for adding me to the group as admin!");
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is promoted to admin.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("regular", "admin"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("I was promoted to admin!");
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is demoted to a regular user.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("admin", "regular"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("I am no longer admin");
});

// Listen for updates where a user joins a group where your bot is admin.
groups.filter(chatMemberFilter("out", "in"), async (ctx) => {
  const user = ctx.chatMember.new_chat_member.user;
  await ctx.reply(`Welcome ${user.first_name} to the group!`);
});

bot.start({

>   // Make sure to specify the desired update types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // Make sure to include the "chat_member" update type for the above handlers to work.
```

  allowed_updates: [...API_CONSTANTS.DEFAULT_UPDATE_TYPES, "chat_member"],
});
```

:::

> Filters include the regular Telegram statuses (owner, administrator, member, restricted, left, kicked) and some additional ones for convenience:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Filters include the regular statuses (owner, administrator, member, restricted, left, kicked) and some additional ones for convenience:
```

> - `restricted_in`: a member of the chat with restrictions;
> - `restricted_out`: not a member of the chat, has restrictions;
> - `in`: a member of the chat (administrator, creator, member, restricted_in);
> - `out`: not a member of the chat (left, kicked, restricted_out);
> - `free`: a member of the chat that isn't restricted (administrator, creator, member);
> - `admin`: an admin of the chat (administrator, creator);
> - `regular`: a non-admin member of the chat (member, restricted_in).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `restricted_in`: a restricted member of the chat
- `restricted_out`: not a member of the chat, has restrictions
- `in`: a member of the chat (administrator, creator, member, restricted_in)
- `out`: not a member of the chat (left, kicked, restricted_out)
- `free`: a non-restricted member of the chat (administrator, creator, member)
- `admin`: an admin of the chat (administrator, creator)
- `regular`: a non-admin member of the chat (member, restricted_in)
```

This plugin simplifies dealing with chat members by offering strongly-typed filters for chat member updates.

## Usage

### Chat Member Filters

You can listen for two kinds of updates regarding chat members using a Telegram bot: `chat_member` and `my_chat_member`.
Both of them specify the old and new status of the user.

- `my_chat_member` updates are always received by your bot to inform you about the status of the bot being updated in any chat, as well as when users block the bot.
- `chat_member` updates are only received if you explicitly include them in the list of allowed updates, they notify about any status changes for users in chats in which the bot is **admin**.

Instead of manually filtering the old and the new statuses, chat member filters do this automatically for you, allowing you to act on any type of transition you're interested in.
Within the handler, the types of `old_chat_member` and `new_chat_member` are narrowed down accordingly.

::: code-group

```ts [TypeScript]
import { API_CONSTANTS, Bot } from "grammy";
import { chatMemberFilter, myChatMemberFilter } from "@grammyjs/chat-members";

> const bot = new Bot("");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
const bot = new Bot(""); // <-- put your bot token between the "" (https://t.me/BotFather)
```

Author: I would avoid this, simply because most plugins docs don't include that comment (except for runner and conversations)

const groups = bot.chatType(["group", "supergroup"]);

> // WITHOUT this plugin, to react whenever a user joins a group you have to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// WITHOUT this plugin, to react whenever a user joins a group, you have to
```

// manually filter by status, resulting in error-prone, difficult to read code.
groups.on("chat_member").filter(
  (ctx) => {
    const { old_chat_member: oldMember, new_chat_member: newMember } =
      ctx.chatMember;
    return (
      (["kicked", "left"].includes(oldMember.status) ||
        (oldMember.status === "restricted" && !oldMember.is_member)) &&
      (["administrator", "creator", "member"].includes(newMember.status) ||
        (newMember.status === "restricted" && newMember.is_member))
    );
  },
  (ctx) => {
    const user = ctx.chatMember.new_chat_member.user;
    await ctx.reply(`Welcome ${user.first_name} to the group!`);
  },
);

> // This plugin simplifies this greatly and reduces the risk of errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// WITH this plugin, the code is greatly simplified and has a lower risk of errors.
```

  await ctx.reply(`Welcome ${user.first_name} to the group!`);
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is added to a group as a regular user.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("out", "regular"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("Hello, thank you for adding me to the group!");
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is added to a group as an admin.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("out", "admin"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("Hello, thank you for adding me to the group as admin!");
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is promoted to admin.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("regular", "admin"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("I was promoted to admin!");
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is demoted to a regular user.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("admin", "regular"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("I am no longer admin");
});

bot.start({
  // Make sure to include the "chat_member" update type for the above handlers to work.
  allowed_updates: [...API_CONSTANTS.DEFAULT_UPDATE_TYPES, "chat_member"],
});
```

```js [JavaScript]
import { API_CONSTANTS, Bot } from "grammy";
import { chatMemberFilter, myChatMemberFilter } from "@grammyjs/chat-members";

> const bot = new Bot("");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
const bot = new Bot(""); // <-- put your bot token between the "" (https://t.me/BotFather)
```

});

// Listen for updates where the bot is added to a group as a regular user.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("out", "regular"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("Hello, thank you for adding me to the group!");
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is added to a group as an admin.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("out", "admin"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("Hello, thank you for adding me to the group as admin!");
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is promoted to admin.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("regular", "admin"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("I was promoted to admin!");
});

// Listen for updates where the bot is demoted to a regular user.
groups.filter(myChatMemberFilter("admin", "regular"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("I am no longer admin");
});

bot.start({
  // Make sure to include the "chat_member" update type for the above handlers to work.
  allowed_updates: [...API_CONSTANTS.DEFAULT_UPDATE_TYPES, "chat_member"],
});
```

```ts [Deno]
import { API_CONSTANTS, Bot } from "https://deno.land/x/grammy/mod.ts";
import {
  chatMemberFilter,
  myChatMemberFilter,
} from "https://deno.land/x/grammy_chat_members/mod.ts";

> const bot = new Bot("");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
const bot = new Bot(""); // <-- put your bot token between the "" (https://t.me/BotFather)
```

  allowed_updates: [...API_CONSTANTS.DEFAULT_UPDATE_TYPES, "chat_member"],
});
```

:::

Filters include the regular statuses (owner, administrator, member, restricted, left, kicked) and some additional ones for convenience:

- `restricted_in`: a restricted member of the chat
- `restricted_out`: not a member of the chat, has restrictions
- `in`: a member of the chat (administrator, creator, member, restricted_in)
- `out`: not a member of the chat (left, kicked, restricted_out)
- `free`: a non-restricted member of the chat (administrator, creator, member)
- `admin`: an admin of the chat (administrator, creator)
- `regular`: a non-admin member of the chat (member, restricted_in)

To summarize, here is a diagram showing what each query corresponds to:

![Diagram showing the statuses corresponding to each query.](/images/chat-members-statuses.svg)

You can create your custom groupings of chat member types by passing an array instead of a string:

```typescript
groups.filter(
  chatMemberFilter(["restricted", "kicked"], ["free", "left"]),
  async (ctx) => {
    const from = ctx.from;
    const { status: oldStatus, user } = ctx.chatMember.old_chat_member;

>     await ctx.reply(
>       `${from.first_name} lifted ` +
>         `${oldStatus === "kicked" ? "ban" : "restrictions"} ` +
>         `from ${user.first_name}`,
>     );

Reviewer 3: Why don't you use a single string? Yeah, it's pretty long but it is much easier to read.
If you want, you can extract the status definition from the string into a variable.

```suggestion
    await ctx.reply(`${from.first_name} lifted ${oldStatus === "kicked" ? "ban" : "restrictions"} from ${user.first_name}`);
```

  },
);
```

#### Example Usage

> The best way to use the filters is to pick a set of relevant statuses, for example 'out', 'regular' and 'admin', then
> make a table of the transitions between them:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The best way to use the filters is to pick a set of relevant statuses, for example 'out', 'regular' and 'admin', then make a table of the transitions between them:
```

> | ↱           | Out         | Regular              | Admin               |
> | ----------- | ----------- | -------------------- | ------------------- |
> | **Out**     | ban-changed | join                 | join-and-promoted   |
> | **Regular** | exit        | restrictions-changed | promoted            |
> | **Admin**   | exit        | demoted              | permissions-changed |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| ↱         | `out`       | `regular`            | `admin`             |
| --------- | ----------- | -------------------- | ------------------- |
| `out`     | ban-changed | join                 | join-and-promoted   |
| `regular` | exit        | restrictions-changed | promoted            |
| `admin`   | exit        | demoted              | permissions-changed |
```

Reviewer 3: And what is "ban-changed"? Is this "ban status was changed" or "ban or user status changed"?

Author: > what is "ban-changed"?

It's not the best name, but you do receive an update whenever a user (outside the group) gets banned/unbanned, and also when restrictions are added/lifted. Not sure how it should be changed for clarity.

  await ctx.reply(`Welcome ${user.first_name}!`);
});
```

### Status Checking Utility

The `chatMemberIs` utility function can be useful whenever you want to use filtering logic within a handler.
It takes as input any of the regular and custom statuses (or an array of them), and narrows the type of the passed variable.

```ts
bot.callbackQuery("foo", async (ctx) => {
  const chatMember = await ctx.getChatMember(ctx.from.id);

  if (!chatMemberIs(chatMember, "free")) {
    chatMember.status; // "restricted" | "left" | "kicked"
    await ctx.answerCallbackQuery({
      show_alert: true,
      text: "You don't have permission to do this!",
    });
    return;
  }

  chatMember.status; // "creator" | "administrator" | "member"
  await ctx.answerCallbackQuery("bar");
});
```

### Hydrating Chat Member Objects

You can further improve your development experience by using the hydration [API transformer](../advanced/transformers).
This transformer will apply to calls to `getChatMember` and `getChatAdministrators`, adding a convenient `is` method to the returned `ChatMember` objects.

```ts
type MyContext = HydrateChatMemberFlavor<Context>;
type MyApi = HydrateChatMemberApiFlavor<Api>;

> const bot = new Bot<MyContext, MyApi>("");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
const bot = new Bot<MyContext, MyApi>(""); // <-- put your bot token between the "" (https://t.me/BotFather)
```

});
```

> ### Hydrate Chat Member

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Hydrating Chat Member Objects
```

> You can further improve your development experience by using the hydration API transformer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can further improve your development experience by using the hydration [API transformer](../advanced/transformers).
```

bot.use(chatMembers(adapter));

bot.start({
  // Make sure to specify the desired update types.

>   allowed_updates: ["chat_member", "message"],

Reviewer 2: Are default update types not needed here?

Author: > Are default update types not needed here?

I now included them to keep things consistent.
